OS is sytem harware manages computer hardware and software resources and it is acting as intermeditery between the user and computer,example windows MAC and Linux. 
Linus is popular one because it is of open source software 
Linux is very secure 
Anti malware software is not required 
it contains lot of distributions eg: redhat ubandu DBMS
Linux OS is faster comapre to other OS. 

GUI and CMI

Grafical user interface- looks user friendly but when you want to do more programming or coding CLI will be useful. 

CLI- using CLI you rae able to do. day to day task or any task relate to programming much faster than y can do with GUI. 

Shell and terminal;

shell is a program that takes cmd from key board and use them to OS to perform.
Terminal is a tool used to pass shell commands.

PWD: present working directory it writes down the complete path name of the present working directory.
LS: cmd is used to list the files and directories in PWD.
ls -l: Complete information of file.  
mkdir: is used to create one or more directrories.
cd: used to change current directory of terminial. 
CD..: this is switchig back to previous directory.
21.05.2026 
Touch :create a one or more files(empty file).
VI: the Vi edittor is the most popular and classical text edittor in the Linux family, also used create the the file with content  
cat: shows content of the file.
tac: will print the content of the file in reverse order.

22.05.2026

Redrect: it can be used to stadard output to file and it over writes the content if the file dosent exist it will create the file.
>>: used to redirect standard out put to file, it do not over write the cdontent. if th file dont exixt it wll also create the file. 

Df -h: cmd used to display the disk space used the file system. 
Head and tail: command linux head command is used to display the first 10 lines of a file or default 
otail cmd is used to find last 10 lines of a file of default.
'|" this command we can use for combaining two or more commends. such that out out of one commend serves as input of onother commend .
Global regular expression print(grep): its used in searching and matching text files and in the regular expression. 
Move cmd : is used to move files nd dir from one location to another location 
this comd is used to choose the files are flder which startes or endds with any letter 
Ls - l: list out the hidden files.
ls- let s: used to list file latest created.ssss
cshs cmd used to change the user loin shell.
chown: changes the ownership of the file or a directory.
SED: stinf edittor it is used to eddit streams edit reguar expressions, it is used for text substitution activities 
it cn be used for other txt manuplition operations and delete insert print and move. the set cmd allows us to edit filew without opening them. 
rm :commend is used to remove files
Cut: cmd is used cut the files and this is sutiable only for simple text format of 
awk: cmd handle some what more complex delimeter unaorganised 
Abcd

